AJ-11: add initial content from discussion thread (#22)
nhsbsa-data-analytics/nhsbsa-analytical-code-assurance-playbook: guidance/01-reproducible/pages/02-readable.qmd

Author: I guess one potential issue is this is very 'code' focussed. Maybe should be generalised to include workflows?

---
title: "Readable"
description: ""
---

> ### Pre-requisite reading
>
> * [AF Duck book: Readable code][duck-book]
> * [NHSBSA DDaT playbook: Naming conventions][ddat-playbook]

## What is readable code?
Readable code is written with clarity and simplicity, making it easy for others to understand and maintain. It prioritises the reader's experience over the convenience of writing code.

> ## Why should we write readable code?
> * Enhances team collaboration
> * Facilitates easier debugging and maintenance
> * Encourages best coding practices
> * Speeds up the onboading process for new team memebers

Author: ```suggestion
## Why should we write readable code?
* Simpler and faster for readers (including yourself!) to understand
* Reduces risk of bugs and makes bugs easier to spot
* Facilitates easier debugging and maintenance
* Enhances team collaboration
* Encourages best coding practices
* Speeds up the onboarding process for new team members
```

Reviewer: Some less important points to consider:

* Easier to identify as potentially reusable in other contexts
* Demonstrates professionalism and care, enhancing organisation image for open code

Author: Thanks, I've folded these into my suggestions

## How do we write readable code?
* Use clear and descriptive namees for variables and functions
* Write small, reusable function that do one thing well
* Comment wisely to explain the 'why', not the 'what'

> * Adhere to a consistent coding style

Reviewer: Does this capture what you suggest @alistair-jones?

```suggestion
* Adhere to a [consistent coding style](https://nhsbsa.github.io/nhsbsa-digital-playbook/development/coding-style-guide/), by agreeing this at the beginning of a project
```

This links to the DDaT playbook, but also emphasises consistency within a project, rather than within a team. Also that it is a conscious decision to actually use a style guide in the first place!

Author: Perfect! Nice one, thanks

> ## How do we write readable code?
> * Use clear and descriptive namees for variables and functions
> * Write small, reusable function that do one thing well
> * Comment wisely to explain the 'why', not the 'what'
> * Adhere to a consistent coding style
> * Regularly refactor to improve code clarity

Author: ```suggestion
## How do we write readable code?
* Use clear and descriptive names for variables, functions and other objects
* Write small, reusable functions that do one thing well
* Regularly [refactor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_refactoring) to improve code clarity
* Comments to explain the 'why', not the 'how' or 'what (if you find yourself explaining what your code does or how it does it, then it probably needs to be refactored!)
* Adhere to a consistent coding style (ideally discuss and agree this with your team before you start!)
```

Reviewer: * Adhere to a consistent coding style (ideally discuss and agree this with your team before you start!)

We could mention use of code linters, these make consistency easier to maintain by reducing the effort needed (and can be part of CI).

* Write small, reusable functions that do one thing well

Worth explicitly pointing out to avoid deep nesting?

Another possible point:

* Avoid magic numbers and strings

Reviewer 2: should we call out to specific style guides for code? the [DDaT playbook](https://nhsbsa.github.io/nhsbsa-digital-playbook/development/coding-style-guide/) for testing calls out the google style guides. we probably only need to call out R, Python, and perhaps a SQL one?

Author: My view is that this page should just say that teams need to agree a style guide and then point to another page to provide implementation specific style guides (R, Python, etc). Maybe it can also link to the DDaT playbook to say 'here is a good reference point).

As to whether it is 'mandatory' - I think we should avoid thinking in those terms (we couldn't mandate it centrally, even if we wanted to, due to resourcing). Rather, we should outline the benefits and make it as easy as possible to choose and implement a style guide and then the responsibilities are on developers and reviewers to ensure it's being implemented locally.

By following these guidelines, we create a codebase that is easier to read, understand, and contribute to, ultimately leading to a more efficient and effective development process. 
For more detailed insights, please refer to the recommended pre-requisite reading.

> ## How will this be enforced?

Author: As discussed, I think we should avoid words like 'enforced'. What about something like this:

```suggestion
## How do we define success?
The readability of your code can be determined through review:
* You should always review your code after you have written it to check for and fix any obvious issues
* [Peer-review][peer-review] should highlight any issues spotted when someone else tries to read your code.

Code can always be improved, so try to make it 'good enough' and avoid falling into the trap of never finishing!
```

[duck-book]: https://best-practice-and-impact.github.io/qa-of-code-guidance/readable_code.html

> [ddat-playbook]: https://nhsbsa.github.io/nhsbsa-digital-playbook/development/coding-naming-conventions/

Author: ```suggestion
[ddat-playbook]: https://nhsbsa.github.io/nhsbsa-digital-playbook/development/coding-naming-conventions/
[peer-review]: /guidance/02-quality-assured/pages/06-peer-reviewed.qmd
```

---
title: "Readable"
description: ""
---

> ### Pre-requisite reading
>
> * [AF Duck book: Readable code][duck-book]
> * [NHSBSA DDaT playbook: Naming conventions][ddat-playbook]

## What is readable code?
Readable code is written with clarity and simplicity, making it easy for others to understand and maintain. It prioritises the reader's experience over the convenience of writing code.

## Why should we write readable code?
* Simpler and faster for readers (including yourself!) to understand
* Reduces risk of bugs and simplifies debugging and future maintenance
* Enhances collaboration by making it easier to share and reuse code across teams / projects
* Encourages coding best practices
* Speeds up the onboarding process for new team members
* Demonstrates professionalism and care, enhancing organisation and team image

> ## How do we write readable code?
> * Use clear and descriptive namees for variables and functions
> * Write small, reusable function that do one thing well
> * Comment wisely to explain the 'why', not the 'what'
> * Adhere to a [consistent coding style](https://nhsbsa.github.io/nhsbsa-digital-playbook/development/coding-style-guide/), by agreeing this at the beginning of a project
> * Regularly refactor to improve code clarity

Author: ```suggestion
## How do we write readable code?
* Use clear and descriptive names for variables, functions and other objects
*  Regularly [refactor](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_refactoring) to improve code clarity
* Comments to explain the 'why', not the 'how' or 'what (if you find yourself explaining what your code does or how it does it, then it probably needs to be refactored!)
* Adhere to a consistent [style guide][ddat-style-guide] (ideally discuss and agree this with your team before you start!)
```
